Read more: https://www.ammoland.com/2019/10/best-of-both-worlds-the-new-dan-wesson-dwx/#ixzz63DL2VNvE
Under Creative Commons License: Attribution
Follow us: @Ammoland on Twitter | Ammoland on Facebook

Kansas City, KS –-(Ammoland.com)- What began as an innovative idea among the brilliant minds at CZ and Dan Wesson resulted in the new jaw-dropping DWX pistol, which is a grand melding between the two pistol families. Available in 9mm and .40 S&W, the DWX is also offered in compact and full-size models, making it ideal for everything from USPSA competition to everyday carry and recreational shooting.

The DWX features a crisp single-action fire control group from a Dan Wesson 1911 and combines it with the ergonomics and capacity of a CZ pistol. The grip angle and contour originate with the venerable CZ 75, providing an incredible fit for most shooters. Likewise, the full-size DWX is compatible with standard CZ 75 grips, while the compact can utilize those from a 75 Compact. In addition, low-profile red aluminum grips were added to help drive the shooter's hand high in the beavertail and provide a fantastic texture.

More than just a competition handgun, the DWX sports a locked-breech barrel system for simplicity and features a CZ-style takedown via the slide stop. The DWX also employs double-stack magazines that allow for a 19+1 capacity in the full-size variant. When it comes to feeding the DWX, the full-size variant uses a magazine based on the P-09/P-10, while the compact models utilize a 75 Compact magazine.

An ambidextrous safety delivers easy access to right- and left-handed shooters, while a flat, K-style trigger offers a textured face and premium accuracy. In addition, front strap checkering aids in grip control, while a 1913 Picatinny rail makes easy work of mounting a light or laser.

The other great feature of the DWX is that it is highly tunable and customizable, making it ideal for competition use. Likewise, the sighting system is highly customizable and includes a 1911-style dovetail front sight and CZ Shadow 2-style rear sight. The match-grade barrel with a bushing-less barrel system resembles that of the P-10/P-09/P-07 and offers shooters unparalleled accuracy.

